Introduction
============

The biology of cancer {#Intro-biology}
---------------------

Cancer was the second cause of death worldwide, with almost 10 million
deaths, in 2018 [@Bray2018] and could in a near future become the
leading cause [@Dagenais2020]. The disease can affect different parts of
the body, although some tissues are more frequently altered than others.
Lung cancer, on which the work described in this manuscript will focus,
is one of the most common cancers and the deadliest according to the
2018 GLOBOCAN database (a project of the [IARC]{acronym-label="IARC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} providing worldwide cancer statistics)
[@Bray2018]. Cancer is a complex disease that is highly controlled by
the genome [@Stratton2009; @Wishart2015]. It originates from normal
cells whose genetic information has been altered. Those alterations can
result from endogenous processes as well as from exogenous processes
like environmental exposures and lifestyle [@Eggert2011; @Luch2005]. As
a result of these alterations, tumor cells have acquired specific
capabilities that allow them to grow in an uncontrolled way as opposed
to normal cells. These capabilities are referred to as the hallmarks of
cancer and are listed in Figure
[\[fig:intro\_hallmarks\]](#fig:intro_hallmarks){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_hallmarks"} [@Hanahan2011].

![**The hallmarks of cancer**. From Hanahan *et al.*
[@Hanahan2011]](Figures/Intro/hallmarks.pdf){width="55%"}

[\[fig:intro\_hallmarks\]]{#fig:intro_hallmarks
label="fig:intro_hallmarks"}

The first part of the introduction describes how genomic changes can
influence cancer development and how the technological advances in the
genomics area have enabled to shed lights on the mechanisms involved.

### The central dogma of molecular biology

At the beginning of the 19th century, Avery and colleagues isolated and
identified the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
as the molecule constituting our chromosomes, defined previously as
carriers of our hereditary material by Thomas Morgan
[@Avery1944; @Morgan]. In 1953, Watson and Crick proposed a new
structure for the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} molecule, the double helix structure
[@Watson1953] (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig1\]](#fig:intro_fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig1"}A). Five years later, Francis Crick
formulates how the information contained in the sequence of nucleic
acids is processed to produce the proteins needed by our cells in what
is called the central dogma of molecular biology (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig1\]](#fig:intro_fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig1"}B-C).

![**The [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
molecule and the central dogma of molecular biology**. A) The structure
of [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}: the double
helix molecule is composed of two complementary strands of nucleotides.
B) Representation of the steps described by the central dogma of
molecular biology. C) Illustration of the molecules resulting from the
central dogma transfers at a higher resolution. Created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/)](Figures/Intro/Fig_1.pdf){width="95%"}

[\[fig:intro\_fig1\]]{#fig:intro_fig1 label="fig:intro_fig1"}

Three main transfers are described by the central dogma: replication,
transcription and translation (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig1\]](#fig:intro_fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig1"}B). During replication, the
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} molecule is
duplicated to provide the needed information to progeny cells. Through
the two other steps, the information contained in
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} is used to
generate proteins. Firstly, the process of transcription consists in
reading the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
sequence to synthesize a single-stranded molecule of the same length,
the [RNA]{acronym-label="RNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}. During
translation, the transcribed molecule is then read using a reading frame
of three nucleotides that form what is called a codon encoding for one
amino acid, the unit of a protein (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig1\]](#fig:intro_fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig1"}C). Note that the genetic code is redundant;
multiple codons can encode an amino acid. The conversion of the
information encoded in our genes to functional gene products like
proteins is referred to as gene expression.

Since the statement of the central dogma, other mechanisms have been
identified as determinant for the expression of a protein. Firstly, the
[RNA]{acronym-label="RNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} molecule
resulting from the transcription process, containing regions coding for
the final amino acids sequence (exons) and non-coding regions (introns),
is actually a [pre-mRNAs]{acronym-label="pre-mRNAs"
acronym-form="singular+short"}. The step transforming precursor
[RNA]{acronym-label="RNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} to mature
[mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"} is called
alternative splicing and consists in truncating intronic regions and
joining different exons together (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig1\]](#fig:intro_fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig1"}B). Hence, one pre-mRNA can lead to multiple
[mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"} that are
then transported outside of the nucleus to be translated into different
proteins. While around 20,000 genes are described, much more proteins
are generated as a result of alternative splicing.

Although all of our cells share the same genetic information and follow
the same dogma, it is known that cells in distinct tissues differentiate
and do not express the same proteins, at the same time. Such differences
can be explained by the fact that several regulatory processes control
gene expression levels. Firstly, genes transcription is dependent on
transcription factors that represent around 7% of the genes
[@Weinberg2014]. They specifically bind to control regions of genes,
provide or prevent access to the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} and can control multiple genes
[@Weinberg2014]. The fact that genes, for example the transcription
factors, can influence multiple genes and thus multiple possibly
unrelated phenotypes is referred to as pleiotropy. After transcription,
[mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"} can also be
regulated through other [RNA]{acronym-label="RNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} molecules, like the
[miRNAs]{acronym-label="miRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"}, that can
degrade [mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"}.
Besides, differences in gene expression can be controlled via
non-genetic mechanisms like epigenetic processes, including histone
modifications and [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} methylation. Histones are proteins around
which the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} is
wrapped and hence control [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} accessibility (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig2\]](#fig:intro_fig2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig2"}). For example, histone phosphorylation leads
to the condensation of the chromatin and inhibits gene expression
[@Weinberg2014]. [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} methylation consists in the addition of a
methyl group to cytosine nucleotides located in
[CpG]{acronym-label="CpG" acronym-form="singular+short"} dinucleotides
sites (cytosine followed by a guanine nucleotide). Such positions are
not homogeneously distributed across the genome and are more frequently
observed in what is called [CpG]{acronym-label="CpG"
acronym-form="singular+short"} islands, themselves mainly observed in
regulatory regions of genes, the promoters. It has been observed that
the methylation of [CpG]{acronym-label="CpG"
acronym-form="singular+short"} sites in promoters can repress gene
expression while methylation of positions in the gene body positively
correlates with gene expression [@Ma2013a].

![**Regulation of transcription**. The figure represents different
configurations of [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} packaging. The [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} molecule is wrapped around histones
proteins that themselves are gathered in complexes called nucleosomes.
This packaging forms the chromatin structure. This structure can be more
or less compact (open versus condensed chromatin), which is influencing
gene expression. When the chromatin is open, transcription factors can
access the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
molecule, and [RNA]{acronym-label="RNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
polymerases can initiate the transcription. Note that the structure of
the chromatin can be influenced by histones modifications and
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} methylation
events. Created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/)](Figures/Intro/transcription_regulation.pdf){width="80%"}

[\[fig:intro\_fig2\]]{#fig:intro_fig2 label="fig:intro_fig2"}

Finally, post-translational events like enzymatic modifications of
proteins or protein cleavage can occur and increase the number of
proteins that can be generated in human cells, hence adding an
additional layer of complexity.

As such, the numerous steps of transferring the
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} sequence
information to proteins reflect the complexity behind protein
expression. Any of these steps can be disrupted and result in altered
molecules and proteins, leading to cancer development.

### Cancer: a genomic disease

Our [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
continuously undergoes diverse alterations and their accumulation over
time can cause cancer. Researchers started to investigate the role of
genomes in cancer at the end of the 19th century. In 1890, David von
Hansemann, by observing cancer cell division under a microscope,
identified for the first time abnormal chromosomes. This observation,
among others, led Theodor Boveri 20 years later to suggest that cancer
was a consequence of alterations in our inherited
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
[@Stratton2009]. His hypothesis was supported in the mid 20th century by
the identification of a recurrent alteration resulting in a peculiar
chromosome 22 (the Philadelphia chromosome), in
[CML]{acronym-label="CML" acronym-form="singular+short"}. While those
alterations have been observed at the chromosomal level, genomes can be
impacted by a multitude of alterations detectable at a lower resolution,
the modification of one nucleotide in the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} sequence being the lowest resolution.

At any position of the genome, the nucleotides might vary from an
individual to another as well as between cells of an individual; those
variations are called [SNVs]{acronym-label="SNVs"
acronym-form="singular+short"}. Also, larger events like nucleotides
[indels]{acronym-label="indels" acronym-form="singular+short"} of up to
1,000 bases and structural variations (chromosomal rearrangements or
large [indels]{acronym-label="indels" acronym-form="singular+short"})
can alter the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
sequence. All of these genomic changes are called mutations.

![**The timing of somatic mutations acquisition**. Mutations can be
inherited at birth (germline mutations, in green) or acquired during
life course (somatic mutations, in yellow, blue and red). They can have
little to no impact (passenger mutations represented by circles) or
confer an advantage to the cell (driver mutations represented by stars).
Adapted from Stratton *et al.*
[@Stratton2009]](Figures/Intro/Fig_mutation_over_life.pdf){width="100%"}

[\[fig:intro\_fig3\]]{#fig:intro_fig3 label="fig:intro_fig3"}

Mutations can occur at different moments in life (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_fig3\]](#fig:intro_fig3){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_fig3"}). Some mutations are inherited at birth
since they are present in the germ line cells (sperm and egg)
transmitted by parents to the offspring. They are called germline
mutations and are found in all the cells of an individual, normal cells
as well as tumor cells. Such mutations are observed at different
frequencies in different populations and are called
[SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s. Another
category of mutations can also be found in all cells of the body even if
they were not transmitted by our parents, if they occur early in life
during the development, at gestation. They are called *de novo*
mutations. Finally, the rest of the mutations found in humans are
acquired later in life as a result of errors in the
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} maintenance or
exogenous damages (See next section). Those mutations occur in cells
outside the germ line and are called the somatic mutations.

Also, whether they are germline or somatic, mutations can have different
impacts. Most mutations have, due to the redundancy of the genetic code,
little to no impact on the genes encoded around them, they are the
passenger mutations [@Vogelstein2013]. Others though alter the gene
product and confer a selective advantage to the cell, *e.g.* a faster
proliferation or a better survival in comparison to neighbour cells
[@Stratton2009]. Those mutations are called driver mutations as they are
thought to contribute to "driving the carcinogenic process" and are
preserved by positive selection. In 2018, the Cancer Gene Census
described more than 700 driver genes (genes carrying driver mutations).
Among them, 90% were associated with somatic mutations and 20% contained
germline mutations [@Sondka2018; @CancerGeneCensus]. Generally, two
types of driver genes exist, oncogenes and [TSG]{acronym-label="TSG"
acronym-form="singular+short"}. Oncogenes are genes whose functions are
to promote cell growth, proliferation or inhibit apoptosis and usually
result from a gain of function. A mutation in an oncogene can thus lead
to a deregulation of one of these processes, hence resulting in
uncontrolled proliferation and cancer. The first mutation identified as
causing cancer was discovered in 1982 by Reddy *et al.* and was
activating an oncogene named *HRAS* [@Reddy1982]. Besides mutations,
other processes like over-expression of genes via amplification or
chromosomal translocations can activate this category of genes. In
contrast to oncogenes, [TSG]{acronym-label="TSG"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s are refraining cellular growth and
proliferation and are often referred to as the \"gatekeepers\" genes.
Mutations in [TSG]{acronym-label="TSG" acronym-form="singular+short"}s
tend to result in a loss of function; the latter genes are inactivated,
and their negative regulation of cell proliferation is cancelled, which
leads to abnormal growth. In 1971, Knudson proposed the two hits
hypothesis which stipulates that both alleles (versions of a gene
inherited by our mother and father, identical alleles leading to the
homozygous state while two different alleles to the heterozygous state)
of a [TSG]{acronym-label="TSG" acronym-form="singular+short"} must be
inactivated or lost for the gene to lose its normal functions
[@Knudson1971]. This hypothesis seemed to explain familial cancer cases
[@Martinez-Jimenez2020]. Indeed when the first hit is an inherited
germline mutation, the cancer susceptibility of a person increases since
only one alteration is needed to alter the [TSG]{acronym-label="TSG"
acronym-form="singular+short"} functions. The second alteration can
result from different events: a mutation in the second allele, the loss
or translocation of chromosome pieces or the loss of an entire
chromosome. The two latter events causing what is called
[LOH]{acronym-label="LOH" acronym-form="singular+short"} [@Eggert2011].

In the case of the two hits hypothesis, two mutations in the same gene
are required for cancer initiation. However, it has been described that
cancer is rather a multi-step process, meaning that multiple mutations
and more than one gene are usually involved. A certain number of
alterations in key pathways are necessary, and it can take several years
for cancer to develop [@Weinberg2014]. However, the multi-step process
can be accelerated. Firstly, as mentioned previously, the inheritance of
germline mutations speeds up the cancer development as one driver
mutation might be present from birth, increasing the probability that
the remaining necessary events, which generally follow a stochastic
process, will also occur. [@Weinberg2014]. Also, even if multiple
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} repair
mechanisms fix most of the alterations that a genome endures, the
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} repair pathways
themselves can be disrupted, leading to an acceleration of the
accumulation of alterations. Such an event increases the mutation rate
of an individual and generates what is called a \"mutator phenotype\"
[@Stratton2009; @Loeb1991]. Finally, driver genes can also be altered by
epigenetic changes that are more frequent, which increases the chance of
disrupting key biological pathways for cancer development.

### Cancer: an environmental disease

Mutations can arise from endogenous processes, for example, errors
happening during [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} replication. In that regard, the
appearance of mutations across the genome seems random, and the advent
of a driver mutation leading to cancer development seem associated with
bad luck. This idea has been developed by Tomasetti *et al.*
[@Tomasetti2015] in a controversial paper, published in 2015, suggesting
that the majority of cancer mutations were due to \"bad luck\". In 2017,
the same authors confirmed that mutations due to random errors represent
a large proportion of mutations in multiple cancers while specifying
that if luck and randomness do play a role in cancer development, other
factors like exogenous processes also impact our
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} and contribute
to cancer development. [@Tomasetti2017]

Cancer incidence varies depending on the countries considered. Lung
cancer incidence, for example, is much higher in Asia, Europe and North
America than in Africa [@globocan_lung]. Those differences can be
explained by the fact that cancer has a heritable component that differs
in different parts of the world and by the fact that environmental
exposures are different across countries. It has been shown, though, in
studies exploring cancer rates in migrants populations, that the
differences observed among populations could not be explained only by
the genetic component [@Peto2001]. In the second half of the 20th
century, epidemiological studies have indicated that several
environmental exposures were associated with cancer incidence, showing
that many cancers could be prevented. One of the most striking findings
was that of Doll *et al.* showing that smokers had a twenty-fold higher
risk of developing lung cancer than non-smokers [@Doll1950]. At the same
period, chemical agents have been identified as being able to induce
cancer, *i.e.* being carcinogenic [@Loeb2008]. Some of these agents were
also defined as mutagenic agents, *i.e.* agents inducing
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} damages.

Some carcinogens can impact cancer evolution without causing
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} alterations;
they are non-mutagenic agents and are considered as tumor promoters. One
example of tumor promoter is alcohol which is a cytotoxic substance. Its
consumption leads indeed to the death of epithelial cells in the mouth
and throat, which triggers the division of the stem cells to regenerate
the epithelium. If tobacco consumption precedes this event,
tobacco-induced mutations might be present in the dividing cells, and
clonal expansion of these mutations may lead to cancer [@Weinberg2014].
In that case, smoking acts as a tumor initiator and alcohol as a
promoter by stimulating cell proliferation. Such interaction between
alcohol and smoking is observed in head and neck cancers. Note, however,
that alcohol can also have a mutagenic effect due to metabolites
generated during ethanol oxidation like acetaldehyde [@Seitz2010]. Other
examples of tumor promoters are steroid hormones acting as mitogenic
agents or chronic inflammation (*e.g.* due to viruses).

We have seen that mutations in our genome can result from endogenous
processes like replication errors or [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} repair defects and from exposition to
carcinogens. Observing these mutations across the whole genome have
revealed patterns. Indeed, each of these processes can generate what is
called mutational signatures, *i.e.* specific combinations of mutations
[@Alexandrov2013]. The first studies of mutational signatures focused on
single base nucleotide substitutions (six possible substitutions: C$>$A,
C$>$T, C$>$G, T$>$A, T$>$C, T$>$G) and their tri-nucleotide contexts
(the 5' and 3' nucleotides flanking the substitution) leading to 96
possible classes of mutations. The classification of all mutations found
in cancer genomes in those 96 groups and the use of mathematical methods
(See section [1.4](#Intro-method){reference-type="ref"
reference="Intro-method"}) to decompose the mutational processes enable
the identification of a limited but diverse set of signatures. In the
case of lung cancers, comparing the DNA of smokers with that of
non-smokers revealed an increase of mutations in smokers mainly due to
an elevation of C to A (C$>$A) mutations, probably caused by the
tendency of tobacco carcinogens to induce this particular change
[@Nik-Zainal2015]. In melanoma samples, an increase of C$>$T
substitutions has been identified as a result of [UV]{acronym-label="UV"
acronym-form="singular+short"} light exposition [@Alexandrov2014]. In
2015, COSMIC provided a curated set of 30 mutational signatures based on
previously published studies on different cancer types [@Cosmic_2015].
Recently the methods to disentangle mutational signatures in human
genomes have been extended. In 2020, Alexandrov *et al.* have considered
higher context to classify single base substitutions by considering two
flanking bases around the positions of the mutations and analyzed as
well other types of mutations like double base substitutions and
[indels]{acronym-label="indels" acronym-form="singular+short"}. This
work led to an expansion of the repertoire of mutational signatures with
more than 60 signatures in total [@Alexandrov2020].

Although some signatures are resulting from endogenous processes, like
defects in [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
repair or unknown processes, multiple signatures have been associated
with preventable exposures. Considering the important impact of
environmental exposures, Wild *et al.* suggested in 2005 the concept of
the *exposome* which corresponds to all the exposures encountered by an
individual during his lifetime (*e.g.* life-style, exposures to
chemicals). He expressed the need to improve the measurement of such
exposures at the same scale of the genomic events measurements
[@Wild2005]. Indeed on the genome side, remarkable technological
advances were made in the past decades allowing researchers to explore
the human genome at high resolution. The evolution of these technologies
is described in the next section.

The era of genomics {#Intro-ngs}
-------------------

### From arrays to next generation sequencing

The identification of the genomics variations leading to cancer has been
enabled by multiple technical and technological advances that occurred
after the discovery of the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} structure. Since that discovery,
researchers have attempted to decipher the hidden information contained
in the double helix molecule. One fundamental advancement in genomics
has been the development of the first generation sequencing by Frederic
Sanger in the 1970s. After automatization, this technique led indeed to
the sequencing of the first human genome in the context of the
[HGP]{acronym-label="HGP" acronym-form="singular+short"} that started in
the 1980s, took 13 years and cost around 3 billion dollars to lead, in
2003, to the sequencing of the 3 billion nucleotides that our
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} constitutes. At
that time, the largest genome sequenced was the 20,000 times smaller
genome of the Epstein-Barr virus [@Roberts2001]. While many researchers
thought it was impossible, the project completed and delivered the first
version of the human genome reference which, after being revised and
improved, is now used on a day-to-day basis in genomics. However, the
first generation sequencing technology was too long and costly to be
applied in larger research projects aiming in that period to catalogue
the genetic variations involved in human diseases.

#### The array technology {#the-array-technology .unnumbered}

At the same period, the microarrays technologies were far less
expensive. This technique consists in disposing, on an array,
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} sequences,
called probes, designed to bind (by hybridization) to target sequences
in a sample. The target sequences are labelled to measure the
hybridization and quantify the target molecules.

![**Microarrays**. A) [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"} arrays: fragmented
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} sequences bind
to designed probes on the microarray, which generates an intensity
signal that varies depending on the allele carried by the
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} sequences. B)
Expression arrays: tagged complementary [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"}, reverse-transcribed from
[mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"} molecules,
bind to gene-specific probes, which generates a fluorescence signal used
to compare expression levels in different cell conditions. Created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/)](Figures/Intro/arrays.pdf){width="90%"}

[\[fig:intro\_arrays\]]{#fig:intro_arrays label="fig:intro_arrays"}

In order to study genomic variations across the genome, specific
microarrays were developed, the genotyping or [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s arrays. Those arrays contain unique
probe sequences, targeting specific positions of the genome, which
hybridize to single-stranded [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} that has been fragmented. This generates
intensities signals varying depending on the allele carried by the
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} sequence
binding to each probe. This intensity, indicating the presence or
absence of each allele, is then converted into genotypes
[@Laframboise2009] (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_arrays\]](#fig:intro_arrays){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_arrays"}A). The [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"} arrays developed for commercial purposes
have evolved, interrogating from 10,000 to millions of sites
simultaneously in a given individual [@Xing2016]. Key produces of these
technologies were developed by Affymetrix and Illumina inc. Those arrays
have been used so far for different purposes. They allowed the
identification of copy number changes or, for arrays with high marker
density regions, the detection of [LOH]{acronym-label="LOH"
acronym-form="singular+short"} events by identifying regions without
heterozygous positions [@Beroukhim2006; @Dutt2007]. They have also been
used to identify germline variants that associate with a certain disease
through [GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS" acronym-form="singular+short"}
[@XueyingMao2007]. As illustrated in Figure
[\[fig:intro\_gwas\]](#fig:intro_gwas){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_gwas"}, [GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} interrogate millions of positions across
the genome by testing their association with a specific trait, like
smoking traits, individually and reveal positions significantly
associated with that trait.

![**Genome-wide association studies**. The figure illustrates a
[GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS" acronym-form="singular+short"} identifying
[SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s associated
with the number of cigarettes smoked per day. For each position, the
association between the variant genotypes and the number of cigarettes
per day is tested (rs789 example). The associations *p*-values are
represented in a Manhattan plot (left panel). [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s reaching the genome-wide significance
threshold of $5.10^{-8}$ are considered as true associations. Those
[SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s do however not
always correspond to the causal variant but often tag a nearby
[SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"} in linkage
disequilibrium. Created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/)](Figures/Intro/GWAS.pdf){width="100%"}

[\[fig:intro\_gwas\]]{#fig:intro_gwas label="fig:intro_gwas"}

Although [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s
arrays are limited to the positions assayed, much more positions can be
studied based on the arrays. Indeed, [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s are transmitted to the offspring linked
to other close [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s
in blocks called haplotypes. This relationship between
[SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s is called
[LD]{acronym-label="LD" acronym-form="singular+short"}. Knowing the
[SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}s composition of
a haplotype enables to predict the genotype of [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s that were not assayed by the array by
using the information of the assayed positions in the haplotype. Hence,
genotyping hundred thousands of [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s allows actually to impute the genotype
of millions of other variants thanks to [LD]{acronym-label="LD"
acronym-form="singular+short"}. The definition of the haplotypes
required though to study such genomic structure in different samples to
build a map as reference. Those were the goals of the
[HapMap]{acronym-label="HapMap" acronym-form="singular+short"} started
in 2002 [@Belmont2003; @Hapmap_britannica].

Micro-arrays platforms have also been used to study the other molecular
layers like the transcriptome and the methylome. For the analysis of the
expression profile, micro-arrays have enabled to measure and compare the
expression levels of specific genes in cells under different conditions,
*e.g.* diseased versus healthy cells or treated versus non-treated
cells. Figure
[\[fig:intro\_arrays\]](#fig:intro_arrays){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_arrays"}B describes the main steps of an expression
array experiment. The extracted [mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs"
acronym-form="singular+short"} molecules from both types of cells, after
being reverse-transcribed to [cDNA]{acronym-label="cDNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} and labelled with fluorescent dye,
hybridize to the genes specific probes fixed on the array. The array is
then scanned using fluorescent imaging [@Tarca2006]. The fluorescence
amount detected at each probe is proportional to the amount of
[mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"} in cells.
While these measures do not provide absolute quantification of gene
expression levels, they enable to compare the expression levels in the
different conditions. Arrays have also been used to study the epigenome
by allowing the detection and the analysis of methylation events. The
most commonly used methylation arrays are the Illumina arrays
[@Illumina_Methylation_infinium]. As for the [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s arrays, probes are designed to target
specific loci of the human genome, in this case,
[CpG]{acronym-label="CpG" acronym-form="singular+short"} positions. The
number of positions interrogated by such arrays can vary from 25,000 to
850,000 positions depending on the array (*e.g.* Illumina 25K, 450K and
850K arrays). Probes are designed and fixed to the array to bind to both
methylated and unmethylated loci (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_methylation\]](#fig:intro_methylation){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_methylation"}). This binding is enabled by a
chemical process called bisulfite conversion, which converts
unmethylated cytosines to uracil and leave methylated cytosine
unchanged. At the hybridization step, a single-based extension is
performed with labelled nucleotides, allowing to distinguish for each
locus a methylated vs non-methylated signal (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_methylation\]](#fig:intro_methylation){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_methylation"}). The ratio between the two signals
at a locus provides a value, called $\beta$ value, which indicates the
level of methylation. This value ranges between 0 and 1, 0 corresponding
to a non-methylated and 1 a methylated position.

![**The Illumina Infinium methylation assay** (From
[@Illumina_Methylation_infinium]). This figure represents the probes
used for methylation profiling by Illumina. A) Infinium type I probes.
Two site-specific probes are found on the array: probes allowing
methylated sites with the preserved cytosine to bind (methylated bead M)
and probes designed for the unmethylated site with the thymine
nucleotide resulting from bisulfite conversion and whole-genome
amplification (methylated bead U). B) Infinium type II probes. Only one
probe per locus is required to bind to both methylated and unmethylated
sites. In that case, single-base extension with labelled nucleotides is
used.](Figures/Intro/Illumina_methylation2.pdf){width="80%"}

[\[fig:intro\_methylation\]]{#fig:intro_methylation
label="fig:intro_methylation"}

#### Next-generation sequencing {#next-generation-sequencing .unnumbered}

While the [SNP]{acronym-label="SNP" acronym-form="singular+short"}
arrays enabled to access the genotype information of millions of
positions, there was still a need to re-sequence human genomes more
efficiently and access the complete [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} sequence to better identify genetic
variations. Around 2005, the second generation of sequencing methods
called [NGS]{acronym-label="NGS" acronym-form="singular+short"} has been
developed.

![**Next Generation Sequencing methods**. The figure describes the
[NGS]{acronym-label="NGS" acronym-form="singular+short"} steps
consisting in: i) fragmenting the nucleic acid molecule, ii) amplifying
the fragments (using [PCR]{acronym-label="PCR"
acronym-form="singular+short"}), iii) sequencing the resulting copies
using single-base extension that adds one after the other labelled
nucleotides whose signals are detected using digital imaging. The
sequencing reads are then aligned to a reference genome to assemble the
reads in a single sequence or to detect mutations across the genome. In
the case of [RNA]{acronym-label="RNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
sequencing, the reads align to exonic regions of the genes and they are
counted to quantify gene expression levels. Created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/)](Figures/Intro/ngs.pdf){width="80%"}

[\[fig:intro\_ngs\]]{#fig:intro_ngs label="fig:intro_ngs"}

The main change in these new methods in comparison to the first one was
the parallelization of the sequencing, which allowed to produce millions
of sequences, called reads, at the same time and hence to decrease
drastically the time of sequencing as well as its cost [@Wetterstrand]
(Figure [\[fig:intro\_ngs\]](#fig:intro_ngs){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_ngs"}). [NGS]{acronym-label="NGS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} methods enabled the rapid re-sequencing
of different parts and lengths of the genome. The entire genome sequence
(except some highly problematic regions) can be accessed with
[WGS]{acronym-label="WGS" acronym-form="singular+short"}. The restricted
sequencing of coding regions (exonic regions) can be performed with
[WES]{acronym-label="WES" acronym-form="singular+short"}. Finally, it is
possible to sequence specific regions of the genome, usually genes,
using targeted sequencing. Based on these techniques, bioinformatics
methods have been developed to detect germline as well as somatic
variants. They consist in mapping (or aligning) the sequenced reads to a
reference genome, and positions that vary from the reference are
identified as variations (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_ngs\]](#fig:intro_ngs){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_ngs"}). A mismatch between a sequenced genome and
the reference genome is expected around every 1,000 bases. To
distinguish somatic from germline mutations, both tumor and normal cells
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} from the same
individual have to be sequenced. The tumor [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} is compared to the normal
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} and variations
found in the tumor cells only are classified as somatic mutations.
Somatic mutations are expected every 1,000,000 bases approximately
depending on the cancer type [@Alexandrov2013].

While the [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
sequencing techniques have been used to detect [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} mutations, they do not explore the
expression or methylation layers. In 2008, the sequencing of the
[RNA]{acronym-label="RNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} molecule
([RNA-Seq]{acronym-label="RNA-Seq" acronym-form="singular+short"}) had
been performed to study expression profiles. In this technique, the
[mRNAs]{acronym-label="mRNAs" acronym-form="singular+short"} molecules
are fragmented and converted to complementary [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} before sequencing, and the resulting
reads are aligned to the reference genome [@Wang2009]. After the
alignment step, the reads can be assigned to genes and the abundance of
reads mapped on a gene, quantified using the number of mapped reads,
reflects the expression level of the gene (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_ngs\]](#fig:intro_ngs){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_ngs"}). A high read count value indicating that a
gene is active and transcribed in that sample. The comparison of the
read counts distributions in samples from different conditions, *e.g.*
samples with and without disease or diseased samples under different
treatment, can be used to identify genes involved in or causing a
specific condition. [RNA-Seq]{acronym-label="RNA-Seq"
acronym-form="singular+short"} can also be used to identify different
transcripts of a gene as well as gene rearrangements like
translocations.

Note that other recent techniques, while not described in the thesis,
also exist to access different omics layers. A new sequencing technique
has been developed for the analysis of the methylome, the bisulfite
sequencing, which in contrast with the methylation arrays, can
interrogate millions of [CpG]{acronym-label="CpG"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s positions across the whole genome as
well as positions in targeted regions. Also, the study of chromatin
accessibility and [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"}-binding proteins is possible thanks to
[ATAC-seq]{acronym-label="ATAC-seq" acronym-form="singular+short"} and
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments followed by sequencing
([ChiP-Seq]{acronym-label="ChiP-Seq" acronym-form="singular+short"})
respectively [@Furey2012; @Yan2020]. Finally, while the sequencing
methods presented so far process [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} coming from a bulk of cells, single-cell
sequencing methods have been developed to perform molecular
characterization at the cell level. These methods allow the
identification of distinct populations of cells in a tumor and hence the
study of tumor heterogeneity and tumor microenvironment
[@Hwang2018; @Finotello2019].

The decreasing costs of genotyping and sequencing methods have enabled
the establishment of genomics studies involving large cohorts
[@Wetterstrand]. Sequencing a human genome today costs less than 1,000
dollars using [NGS]{acronym-label="NGS" acronym-form="singular+short"}
methods while it would still cost millions if the Sanger method was
chosen. Multiple research groups have coordinated their efforts to
create large consortia for that purpose and in many cases have shared
the resulting data to the scientific community. The next section
provides an overview of some of these initiatives.

### Large public databases

#### The Cancer Genome Atlas {#the-cancer-genome-atlas .unnumbered}

[TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA" acronym-form="singular+short"} is a public
database providing access to 10,000 patients whose tumors have undergone
multi-omics characterization. The project was launched in 2005 by the
[NIH]{acronym-label="NIH" acronym-form="singular+short"} and aimed at
characterizing the genomic alterations underlying several cancer types.
For that purpose, multiple omics data were generated [@Tomczak2015]. The
tumor and normal samples from most of the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} participants have been sequenced using
[WES]{acronym-label="WES" acronym-form="singular+short"}. Based on these
data, multiple variant callers have been used to catalogue the germline
and somatic mutations present in each sample. Genotyping has been
performed to analyze copy number variations. The transcriptome of most
samples has also been sequenced, using [RNA]{acronym-label="RNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} and [miRNAs]{acronym-label="miRNAs"
acronym-form="singular+short"} sequencing. The methylation profiles of
the tumors were explored with the use of 25K or 450K methylation arrays.
Finally, protein expression profiling has been performed based on
[RPPA]{acronym-label="RPPA" acronym-form="singular+short"}. In addition
to the molecular data, clinical and environmental exposures data were
collected when possible. The [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} projects also delivered the
histopathological images associated to each tumor. Based on these
diverse omics and clinical datasets, \"marker papers\" describing the
molecular landscape of each tumor type have been published. While the
tissues explored at the beginning of the initiative were limited to
lung, brain and ovaries, the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} data encompasses today molecular data
from 33 different cancer types. Those cancer-specific studies led to the
identification of genomics alterations causing each cancer type, hence
the discovery of new driver genes and potential cancer biomarkers,
*i.e.* molecules found in the body as an indicator of a disease or
specific condition. Also, cancer subtypes were characterized on the
molecular level and subtype-specific alterations were identified, which
resulted in new clinical managements of tumors [@Weinstein2013]. In
parallel to the cancer-specific studies, the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} research network launched, in 2012, the
Pan-Cancer Atlas initiative aiming at exploring the commonalities
between cancer types, distinguishing tissue-specific determinants of
cancer as well as increasing the statistical power for the
identification of genomic alterations [@Weinstein2013]. This initiative
was completed in 2018 and the data have been released and associated to
27 papers, published in Cell, focusing on three main topics: i)
cell-of-origin patterns and cancers subgrouping, ii) oncogenic
processes, and iii) signaling pathways involved in cancer
[@PanCanatlas_site].

#### The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) initiatives {#the-international-cancer-genome-consortium-icgc-initiatives .unnumbered}

The [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA" acronym-form="singular+short"} studies
focused their efforts on the characterization of the cancer exomes.
However, exomes represent only 1% of the human genome and much more can
be discovered by exploring the remaining 99% of the genome. In 2007, the
[ICGC]{acronym-label="ICGC" acronym-form="singular+short"} project was
launched to study more than 20,000 whole genomes from 50 cancer types
having an impact in multiple regions of the world (the 25k initiative).
The international consortium aimed at generating a catalogue of the
somatic mutations in those cancer types, sharing the resulting datasets
and complementing them with transcriptomic and epigenomic datasets
[@Hudson2010; @Cieslik2020]. Based on the samples included in the
[TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA" acronym-form="singular+short"} and the
[ICGC]{acronym-label="ICGC" acronym-form="singular+short"} projects, the
[PCAWG]{acronym-label="PCAWG" acronym-form="singular+short"} project, an
[ICGC]{acronym-label="ICGC" acronym-form="singular+short"} initiative
also know as the Pan-Cancer project, has arisen [@Campbell2020]. The
project relied on more than 2600 samples from 38 different tumor types
and aimed at meta-analyzing whole-genome data across cancers along the
same lines as the PanCancer Atlas project. The first results from these
data have been released in 2020 in a series of publications in Nature
[@Cieslik2020]. While the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} initiative enabled the study of the
coding regions of the samples, the [PCAWG]{acronym-label="PCAWG"
acronym-form="singular+short"} project, thanks to the use of whole
genome sequences, was designed to explore broader mutational patterns in
the coding and non-coding regions, from small to large events like
structural variations. For example, chromoplexy and chromothripsis
events, which are complex chromosomal rearrangements resulting from
catastrophic genomic events, have been observed in more cancers than
expected, 17.8% and 22.3% of the tumors, respectively [@Cieslik2020].
Also, one major result from the [PCAWG]{acronym-label="PCAWG"
acronym-form="singular+short"} project has been the expansion of the
mutational signatures mentioned in section
[1.1](#Intro-biology){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-biology"}
[@Alexandrov2020], as well as the discovery of 16 structural variants
signatures [@Li2020].

#### UKbiobank {#ukbiobank .unnumbered}

The previously described projects mainly targeted the somatic landscape
of genomes. Other large projects have enabled the research community to
explore the germline component of human disease. The largest public
dataset, focusing on germline genetics, has been generated by the
UKbiobank project, which started in 2010 in the UK. This project
gathered data from a population-based cohort of around 500,000
participants between 40 and 69 [@Bahcall2018] and had as main objective
to improve our understand of the interaction between genetics and
multiple human diseases. For that purpose, all participants were
genotyped. Besides, multiple other biological samples, like urine, blood
and saliva as well as physical measures, *e.g.* brain
[MRI]{acronym-label="MRI" acronym-form="singular+short"}, heart and eye
measurements, were collected. It is a prospective cohort; participants
are followed up and are linked to electronic health records
[@Bycroft2018]. The genotyping data of the full cohort were released in
2017. Based on this dataset and the large panel of phenotypes, a
multitude of [GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS" acronym-form="singular+short"}
studies related to human diseases have been performed and their
resulting summary statistics were made available. In 2019, around 100
[GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS" acronym-form="singular+short"} studies
resulting from the UKbiobank data were available on the
[GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS" acronym-form="singular+short"} catalogue,
which provides curated [GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} summary statistics results
[@Buniello2019]. The follow-up of the patients has established that, in
2018, 79,000 of the participants were diagnosed with cancer
[@Bycroft2018], which means that cancer-related traits can also be
studied using this dataset. After the release of the genotyped and
imputed data, [WES]{acronym-label="WES" acronym-form="singular+short"}
and [WGS]{acronym-label="WGS" acronym-form="singular+short"} sequencing
of the samples have been initiated. Part of the exome data, around
50,000 exomes, have already been released and about 200,000 exomes
should be expected by the end of 2020. These data foreshadow future key
findings in genomics, a better understanding of molecular and phenotypic
interactions and probably an improvement of the translation of those
findings in the clinic.

#### Data sharing {#data-sharing .unnumbered}

With the increasing number of genomics studies, public repositories,
like the [dbGAP]{acronym-label="dbGAP" acronym-form="singular+short"},
the [EGA]{acronym-label="EGA" acronym-form="singular+short"} or
[GEO]{acronym-label="GEO" acronym-form="singular+short"}, have been
established to store petabytes of genomics data that can be accessed by
the research community. In addition, large projects, like the
[TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA" acronym-form="singular+short"} and
[ICGC]{acronym-label="ICGC" acronym-form="singular+short"}, have worked
on solutions to improve data storage and accessibility. One of the goals
of those projects was to promote open-access data and the development of
tools to foster the reuse of the data by the research community
[@Weinstein2013; @Hudson2010]. In 2010, the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} provided the data in open access for the
first time [@TCGA_milestones] and updated and extended the content of
the open access data over the years. In 2016, the
[GDC]{acronym-label="GDC" acronym-form="singular+short"} was launched by
the [NCI]{acronym-label="NCI" acronym-form="singular+short"} to store
all the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA" acronym-form="singular+short"} data
[@Jensen2017]. For each omics, the data are categorized by levels:
low-level data (raw and unnormalized data) that generally enable
individuals re-identification are under controlled access, while
higher-level data (processed data, clinical data) that do not permit
re-identifiability are available without any requirement. In addition to
providing the data storage, the [GDC]{acronym-label="GDC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} also aimed at harmonizing and sharing the
bioinformatics pipelines used to process the data
[@Jensen2017; @Gao2019]. The processed data resulting from the PanCancer
Atlas papers are also available via the [NIH]{acronym-label="NIH"
acronym-form="singular+short"} [GDC]{acronym-label="GDC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} website [@PanCancerAtlas_data] and allow
researchers to explore broader genomic features like immune variables
[@Thorsson2018] or biological pathway measures [@Knijnenburg2018]. Also,
cloud computing solutions have been developed to facilitate the analyses
of large public genomic datasets while avoiding the download and
duplication of the data. The [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} and [ICGC]{acronym-label="ICGC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} data are available and can be analyzed on
the cloud, for example via the [CGC]{acronym-label="CGC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} [@Lau2017] or the
[ISB-CGC]{acronym-label="ISB-CGC" acronym-form="singular+short"}
[@Reynolds2017]. Also, the [ICGC]{acronym-label="ICGC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} consortium, to process the
[PCAWG]{acronym-label="PCAWG" acronym-form="singular+short"} data, has
developed a computational tool, Butler, which simplifies genomic
analyses that have to be run on clouds environments (academic or
commercial) [@Yakneen2020].

In the past decades, the development of genomics technologies and the
implementation of large consortia have enabled to characterize human
cancers on the molecular level. The understanding of cancer causes and
the biological mechanisms underlying tumor development has been
improved. Also, due to the identification of correlations between
molecular events and patient's prognosis and response to treatments,
molecular studies have impacted the way that tumors are classified and
managed in the clinic.

The example of lung cancer {#Intro-lung}
--------------------------

### Lung cancer subtypes and etiology

![**Lung cancer subtypes.** Each lung cancer type occurs at different
frequencies as well as at distinct locations in the lung (from proximal
to distal locations). Each box on the figure is associated to one cancer
type and provides their characteristics (frequency, localisation,
etiology and overall 5-year survival rate (5y SR))
[@Travis2010; @Derks2018; @Simbolo2019a; @ASCO]. Figure created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/)](Figures/Intro/Lung_cancer.pdf){width="100%"}

[\[fig:intro\_lung\]]{#fig:intro_lung label="fig:intro_lung"}

As mentioned at the beginning of the manuscript, lung cancer is one of
the most common and deadliest cancer worldwide. Several subtypes of lung
cancers have been identified (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_lung\]](#fig:intro_lung){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_lung"}). The most common lung cancers are usually
divided into two groups: the [SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} and the [NSCLC]{acronym-label="NSCLC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} samples, representing respectively around
20 and 75% of the lung cancers [@Politi2015]. The second group is
further separated into two main subgroups: the
[LUAD]{acronym-label="LUAD" acronym-form="singular+short"} and the
[LUSC]{acronym-label="LUSC" acronym-form="singular+short"}. Also, rarer
forms of lung cancer exist. Multiple lung cancer subtypes, including
such rarer cancers, were grouped in one category named the lung
neuroendocrine tumors by the [WHO]{acronym-label="WHO"
acronym-form="singular+short"} 2015 classification [@Travis2015]. This
group comprises the pulmonary carcinoids, including the typical and
atypical carcinoids, [LCNEC]{acronym-label="LCNEC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} as well as the previously mentioned
[SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC" acronym-form="singular+short"} tumors. Each
lung cancer type can be distinguished by different etiologies,
histopathological characteristics, molecular profiles and clinical
outcomes (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_lung\]](#fig:intro_lung){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_lung"}).

The strongest risk factor for lung cancer is smoking. Indeed,
[SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC" acronym-form="singular+short"}s and
[LCNEC]{acronym-label="LCNEC" acronym-form="singular+short"}s are
frequently found in heavy smokers. Smoking is also a major risk factor
for [LUAD]{acronym-label="LUAD" acronym-form="singular+short"} and
[LUSC]{acronym-label="LUSC" acronym-form="singular+short"} cancers
[@Campbell2016]. However, lung cancer can also develop in non-smokers.
In particular, the [LUAD]{acronym-label="LUAD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} category corresponds to the lung cancer
type most commonly found in never smokers. Although the etiology of the
pulmonary carcinoids is not clear, the majority of these tumors are
found in nonsmokers [@Derks2018]. In addition, around only 15% of
smokers develop lung cancer suggesting than other factors mediate lung
cancer risk.

### Lung cancer susceptibility

While exposures other than smoking like air pollution, radon, heavy
metals or asbestos have been identified as lung cancer risk factors
[@DeAlencar2020], genetics is also contributing to the disease risk. In
line with this hypothesis, it has been shown that having a family
history of lung cancer confers a 2.5 fold lung cancer risk increase
[@Amos1999]. Further evidence of lung cancer germline susceptibility has
been revealed by [GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} studies, with the identification of
common variations associated with lung cancer. Genes involved in
nicotine addiction (*CHRNA* genes), telomere activities (*TERT*) as well
as genes related to the DNA repair and cell-cycle pathways (*e.g.*
*Check2*, *RAD52* or *CDKN2A*) have been identified [@Bosse2018]. Also,
some lung cancer associated variants were identified as related to the
propensity to smoke [@Thorgeirsson2008; @McKay2017] and genetic
correlations between lung cancer and smoking traits, like smoking
initiation, smoking cessation or smoking intensity have been described
[@McKay2017]. Such observations provided evidence that susceptibility
variants could influence lung cancer risk through environmental
exposures. Hence, [GWAS]{acronym-label="GWAS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} studies have enabled to gain insights on
lung cancer etiology as well as on the biological pathways involved in
the disease. However, the variants identified so far do not account for
most of the heritability of lung cancer, estimated at 18% and remaining
today largely unexplained [@McKay2017].

### Lung cancer molecular profiling

In the past decades, molecular profiles of human tumors, including lung
tumors, have also been explored thanks to the development of
[NGS]{acronym-label="NGS" acronym-form="singular+short"} studies. Such
studies have, for example, established that lung cancers are among the
cancer types with the highest mutational burden (total number of
mutations for a given part of [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"}) [@Lawrence2013]. As mentioned in Section
[1.1](#Intro-biology){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-biology"},
in smoking-related cancers, those mutations revealed a signature
associated with tobacco consumption. Among the
[COSMIC]{acronym-label="COSMIC" acronym-form="singular+short"}
signatures identified by Alexandrov *et al.*
[@Alexandrov2013; @Alexandrov2020], the smoking signature corresponds to
the Signature 4 ([COSMIC]{acronym-label="COSMIC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} version 2) and SBS 4
([COSMIC]{acronym-label="COSMIC" acronym-form="singular+short"} version
3). Those signatures are the results of [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} damages caused mainly by
benzo\[$\alpha$\]pyrene, which is a mutagenic compound found in tobacco
smoke and whose effects on [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} has been shown in experimental
mutagenesis studies [@Nik-Zainal2015]. Even though smoking does heavily
impact the lung tissue, it has been shown that quitting smoking can
restore the damaged tissue [@Yoshida2020].

In addition, molecular analyses of lung tumors have identified cancer
driver genes in the different cancer types. Among those genes, the
*[EGFR]{acronym-label="EGFR" acronym-form="singular+short"}* gene, which
is part of the protein kinase family currently known to be mutated in
around 15% of the [LUAD]{acronym-label="LUAD"
acronym-form="singular+short"} samples [@Collisson2014], has been
related to therapeutic response in 2004 [@Politi2015]. Indeed LUAD
samples, carrying activating mutations in the
*[EGFR]{acronym-label="EGFR" acronym-form="singular+short"}* gene, are
responsive to tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy and have an improved
survival in comparison to other cancer patients treated with
chemotherapy. Such molecular studies largely influenced the way that
lung tumors are classified since it is only since those discoveries that
[NSCLC]{acronym-label="NSCLC" acronym-form="singular+short"} are further
sub-classified. Guidelines were published in 2013 to include molecular
testing, mainly based on *[EGFR]{acronym-label="EGFR"
acronym-form="singular+short"}* and *ALK* alterations testing, in the
clinical practice for the [NSCLC]{acronym-label="NSCLC"
acronym-form="singular+short"} patients. In 2018, those guidelines were
updated and new alterations, like rearrangements in the tyrosine kinase
*ROS1*, are now recommended for molecular testing [@Lindeman2018]. In
2012 and 2014, the [TCGA]{acronym-label="TCGA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} marker papers on the two lung cancer
cohorts ([LUAD]{acronym-label="LUAD" acronym-form="singular+short"} and
[LUSC]{acronym-label="LUSC" acronym-form="singular+short"}) were
published. The authors expanded the molecular profiling of these tumors
and hence the list of drivers genes, improving the understanding of the
biological mechanisms involved and providing new opportunities for
patients management [@Network2012; @Collisson2014]. Those studies also
explored the transcriptomic, methylation and proteomic data from the
lung tumors. Based on their expression profiles, the
[LUAD]{acronym-label="LUAD" acronym-form="singular+short"} tumors, were
divided into subtypes that could help to refine those tumors
classification [@Collisson2014].

The identification of driver genes in lung cancer has also led to the
proposal of molecular targets for early detection. The molecular
profiling of [SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC" acronym-form="singular+short"}s
is an example of such an application. [SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s are characterized by universal
inactivation of both *RB1* and *TP53* genes
[@Peifer2012a; @George2015; @Fernandez-Cuesta2019]. In 2016,
Fernandez-Cuesta *et al.* analyzed [ctDNA]{acronym-label="ctDNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"}, which are fragments of tumor
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} released in the
bloodstream that can be used as molecular biomarkers, in
[SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC" acronym-form="singular+short"}s. They showed
that *TP53* mutations were detectable in the
[ctDNA]{acronym-label="ctDNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} of the
[SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC" acronym-form="singular+short"} cases
[@Fernandez-cuesta2016]. [ctDNA]{acronym-label="ctDNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} applications are viable for multiple
cancer types. In 2018, Cohen *et al.* described a blood test called
CancerSEEK, detecting proteins and mutations in cell-free
[DNA]{acronym-label="DNA" acronym-form="singular+short"} for the early
detection of eight different cancer types, including lung cancer
[@Cohen2018]. Such tests face though sensitivity issues due to the low
abundance of mutated [DNA]{acronym-label="DNA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} in body fluids, hence adapted
bioinformatics tools are needed. I contributed to the optimization of
such tool, Needlestack, a highly sensitive multi-sample variant caller
[@Delhomme2020].

Even though rare forms of lung cancers are less explored than the common
lung cancers, recent molecular studies have started to characterize the
lung neuroendocrine tumors as well
[@Fernandez-Cuesta2014; @George2018; @Rekhtman2016; @Simbolo2019]. Those
studies have revealed that, on top of their histopathological
differences, the lung neuroendocrine neoplasms were also distinct
molecular entities [@Fernandez-Cuesta2019]. Low mutational burden has
been observed in the atypical and typical pulmonary carcinoids in
contrast to the highly mutated [LCNEC]{acronym-label="LCNEC"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s and [SCLC]{acronym-label="SCLC"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s [@Derks2018]. Also, the transcriptomic
profiling of those tumors has been investigated. These analyses
identified molecular subgroups in different cancer types, revealing the
molecular heterogeneity in those tumors [@George2018; @Rudin2019]. The
work described in chapters
[\[Chapter1\]](#Chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="Chapter1"} and
[\[Chapter2/4\]](#Chapter2/4){reference-type="ref"
reference="Chapter2/4"} of this thesis contributed to the molecular
characterization of the lung neuroendocrine tumors.

The discoveries described in this section were enabled thanks to the
large amount of data generated during the era of genomics (See Section
[1.2](#Intro-ngs){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-ngs"}). However,
the analyses of these data have raised multiple challenges that required
the use and development of specific computational methods. The next
section intends to describe those aspects.

Interpreting high dimensional data {#Intro-method}
----------------------------------

The evolution of genotyping and sequencing technologies led to the
generation of high dimensional datasets. In Section
[1.2](#Intro-ngs){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-ngs"}, we have
seen for example that arrays can interrogate thousands to millions of
positions across the genome and that sequencing techniques can provide
the entire genome sequence or the expression levels of thousands of
genes. While the amount of information unveiled by these methods is
colossal, it can also bring about several challenges and adapted
computational methods are required to analyze and interpret the data.
The issues resulting from high dimensionality are associated to what is
called the curse of dimensionality, firstly introduced by Bellman in
1961 and stipulating that the number of samples needed to interpret high
dimensional data analyses appropriately increases exponentially with the
number of dimensions [@Altman2018]. In omics datasets, even though large
cohorts have been implemented (see section
[1.2](#Intro-ngs){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-ngs"}), the
number of variables (also known as features), $p$, to analyze can be
largely superior to the number of samples, $n$, included in the study.
This introduces the $n<<p$ problem, which leads to multiple issues.
Firstly, usual statistical models like regression models need to be
adapted since they require $p<n$. There is also a substantial amount of
noise in the generated data that can mask the true signal in the data,
*i.e.* not all the measured features are of interest
[@Domingos2012; @Ronan2016]. In addition, when the number of dimensions
increases, the data points can occupy a more voluminous space and a
larger proportion of this space will be empty, we say that the data are
sparse (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_highdim\]](#fig:intro_highdim){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_highdim"}) [@Altman2018]. High data sparsity
influences basic properties to which we are used to in two or three
dimensions like distances. In high dimensions, distances between points
increase and all points seem at the same distance from each other
[@Ronan2016; @Altman2018]. Also, the higher the dimensions, the lower
the correlations between the features will be. For those reasons, it is
thus statistically more difficult to identify groups of points with
similar characteristics compared with random events, as such larger
sample sizes are required to distinguish meaningful relationships.
Another issue resulting from high dimensionality is multi-collinearity.
Since the number of features is high, the information they carry can be
correlated and become redundant; some variables might be defined as a
linear combination of others which makes the data interpretation more
difficult [@Altman2018]. Finally, the nature of omics datasets
complicates the visualization of the data. In this section, we will
discuss in a first instance different strategies to explore such complex
datasets and secondly focus on methods that attempt to diminish the
problem of the curse of dimensionality: the dimensionality reduction
methods.

![**Illustration of data sparsity.** Figure from [@Ronan2016]. The
figure represents how the data occupy the available space when going
from a one-dimensional space to two and three-dimensional spaces (from
left to right panels).
](Figures/Intro/high_dimentionality.pdf){width="80%"}

[\[fig:intro\_highdim\]]{#fig:intro_highdim label="fig:intro_highdim"}

### Supervised and unsupervised methods

Different approaches exist to analyze high dimensional data like omics
data. In the case where specific biological hypotheses need to be
tested, confirmatory data analyses based on inference models can be
used. It can also happen that there are no predefined hypotheses and
that the goal is to \"let the data talk\", in that case,
[EDA]{acronym-label="EDA" acronym-form="singular+short"} will be more
adapted [@Holmes]. A broad panel of statistical methods exists to assist
both approaches. Among them, a large proportion can be grouped in the
popular category of machine learning methods. The term
[ML]{acronym-label="ML" acronym-form="singular+short"} was used for the
first time by Arthur Samuel around 1950 and defined a group of computer
algorithms able to learn without being explicitly programmed to learn.
Depending on the definition of learning, different classes of
[ML]{acronym-label="ML" acronym-form="singular+short"} methods have been
established. In 1997, Tom Mitchell proposed a formal definition of
algorithms learning saying that \"A computer program is said to learn
from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance
measure P if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves
with experience E.\" [@Mitchell1997]. This definition matches a class of
[ML]{acronym-label="ML" acronym-form="singular+short"} methods, the
supervised learning methods, used for classification and regression
tasks. A common example is the identification of spam emails, where
labelling emails in the spam or non-spam categories would be the task T,
learning from a set of labelled emails would be the experience, and the
proportion of correctly classified emails would be the performance
measure P. However, [ML]{acronym-label="ML"
acronym-form="singular+short"} algorithms that simply learn from the
input dataset without predefined ground truth (labelled data) also exist
and are part of the unsupervised [ML]{acronym-label="ML"
acronym-form="singular+short"} methods. Those methods learn underlying
structures in the data; hence algorithms like clustering or
dimensionality reduction methods such as [PCA]{acronym-label="PCA"
acronym-form="singular+short"}, which was developed even before
[ML]{acronym-label="ML" acronym-form="singular+short"}, are often
included in the unsupervised learning category. In the next paragraphs,
both supervised and unsupervised learning are described (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_supervisedVSunsupervised\]](#fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised"}).

![**Machine learning methods: supervised vs non-supervised methods.** A)
Supervised methods: a model is trained on several variables, features,
to recognize predefined labels. The trained model is then applied to an
unlabelled dataset for prediction purposes. B) Unsupervised methods: a
model learns structures underlying a dataset that has not been labelled.
Those methods are divided into two main categories: clustering methods
to identify subgroups of samples and dimensionality reduction methods to
explore the data in lower dimensions and highlight specific structures.
Figure adapted from [@Libbrecht2015].
](Figures/Intro/supervised_vs_unsupervised.pdf){width="100%"}

[\[fig:intro\_supervisedVSunsupervised\]]{#fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised
label="fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised"}

**Supervised analyses**

The goal of supervised methods is to predict the value of an outcome
based on a set of features given as inputs. Depending on the type of
outcome, supervised analyses can be further divided into two main
categories: classification or regression problems. In classification
problems, the outcome is categorical, *e.g.* a binary variable
distinguishing a diseased or healthy status or a multi-classes variable
like cancer subtypes. In regression problems, the objective is to
predict a continuous variable. Note that some regression models, like
logistic regressions, where the outcome variable is discrete, can be
used though to perform classification. The main steps of supervised
analyses consist in: i) defining the labels of each sample in the
dataset, ii) train the model to classify the samples in the correct
category, and iii) use the generated model on a dataset containing
independent and unknown instances (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_supervisedVSunsupervised\]](#fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised"}A). Several types of
supervised methods exist and have to be chosen with regard to the nature
of the data. The simplest supervised models are regression models. While
the most common regression algorithms model linear relationships, other
methods like [SVM]{acronym-label="SVM" acronym-form="singular+short"} or
neural networks can adapt to non-linear data. Another parameter that
determines the type of methods to use is the data type; some methods
deal only with numerical features while others like decision trees are
more flexible. Figure
[\[fig:intro\_randomforest\]](#fig:intro_randomforest){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_randomforest"} describes a method based on decision
trees, the random forest algorithm.

![**The random forest method.** Figure from [@Denisko2018]. A labelled
dataset (A) is taken as input and processed by multiple decision trees
(B and C) built using random selections of features and samples. The
decision trees form a random forest (D). Each tree classifies the input
samples and the votes given by the different trees are then combined to
provide the final predictions. The label with the most votes being
chosen (here red label). ](Figures/Intro/random_forest.pdf){width="80%"}

[\[fig:intro\_randomforest\]]{#fig:intro_randomforest
label="fig:intro_randomforest"}

Regardless of the method used, the model and its results have to
generalize to other datasets. In order to assess generalizability, the
[ML]{acronym-label="ML" acronym-form="singular+short"} algorithm has to
be trained on a training dataset, and a testing dataset containing
independent samples has to be used to validate the results. Two main
errors underlying the generalization issue exist: bias and variance
[@Domingos2012]. The first scenario occurs when the model is
underfitting the data, *i.e.* the model has a poor performance even on
the training data for example because of a model that is not complex
enough (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_biasVSvariance\]](#fig:intro_biasVSvariance){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_biasVSvariance"} left panel). When the model is
underfitting the data, it is as well unable to generalize to other
datasets. In the second case, when the number of features is too large
or the number of samples small, the chances to encounter features that
can perfectly discriminate two output categories or perfectly predict an
outcome increase. The model, in that case, performs correctly on the
training dataset but fails to generalize to other datasets and is
qualified as high variance model. Such performance discrepancy indicates
that the model overfits (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_biasVSvariance\]](#fig:intro_biasVSvariance){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_biasVSvariance"} right panel). Note that in high
dimensional data, overfitting and data sparsity, resulting from the
$n<<p$ problem mentioned at the beginning of this section, can be
linked. Indeed, in such data, since the number of samples in the
training dataset is fixed and limited, the entire input space is not
covered. Thus the machine learning algorithm has not faced all possible
configurations during the learning phase and the ability of the model to
generalize can be diminished.

![**High bias and high variance models.** Created with
[BioRender.com](https://biorender.com/).
](Figures/Intro/overfitting.pdf){width="80%"}

[\[fig:intro\_biasVSvariance\]]{#fig:intro_biasVSvariance
label="fig:intro_biasVSvariance"}

One method that can be used to detect as well as overcome overfitting is
cross-validation. The method consists in randomly splitting the dataset
in $k$ folds and iteratively training the model on $k-1$ folds while
reserving the remaining $k$th fold for testing (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_crossvalidation\]](#fig:intro_crossvalidation){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_crossvalidation"}). The overall performance of the
model can be assessed by averaging the performances in the testing folds
from each iteration. As a result, while none of the samples is used
simultaneously in the training and testing group, the entire dataset is
used for training as well as is used in the testing phase. Hence,
cross-validation can also be beneficial in studies with low sample
sizes. One extreme case of cross-validation is the leave-one-out
analysis, where $k=1$. Each sample is set aside from the training set
and predicted at each iteration.

![**$K$-fold cross-validation.** Figure from [@BradleyBrandonGreenwell].
The figure illustrates 5-fold cross-validation. Five rounds are thus
represented. In each of them, 4 folds are used to train the model and
the model is tested on the remaining fold. The performances resulting
from the test phase in each round are then averaged to estimate the
overall performance of the model and its ability to generalize.
](Figures/Intro/cross_validation.pdf){width="90%"}

[\[fig:intro\_crossvalidation\]]{#fig:intro_crossvalidation
label="fig:intro_crossvalidation"}

In addition, to find a compromise between bias and variance, parameter
tuning and algorithm optimization might be required. Note that a third
dataset, referred to as the validation dataset, can be introduced for
the optimization step. In this setting, multiple models (*e.g.* one
algorithm with different sets of parameters or different algorithms)
learn on the training set, and their performances are evaluated on the
validation dataset. The model with the best performance can then be
applied on the testing dataset.

**Unsupervised analyses**

Unsupervised algorithms are hypothesis-free methods and can be
associated to exploratory analyses [@Oskolkov]. The goal of such methods
is usually to identify and extract useful properties of the data
[@Eraslan2019]. In contrast to the supervised methods, each element of
the dataset is not labelled, no predefined groups are given to the
algorithms. Thus, it is not possible to compare the algorithm output
with a predefined truth and the data do not need to be split in training
and testing datasets (Figure
[\[fig:intro\_supervisedVSunsupervised\]](#fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_supervisedVSunsupervised"}B). Since there is thus
no feedback on the performance of the unsupervised model, often the
validation of the results is required.

As for the supervised analyses, there are several unsupervised
algorithms. A commonly used category of unsupervised methods that can
unveil structure in the data is the group of clustering algorithms
(*e.g.* $k$-means clustering, hierarchical clustering, density-based
clustering). Those methods aim at grouping elements together based on
common patterns observed in the set of features. In the field of cancer,
clustering algorithms can be used, for example, to identify new subtypes
of cancers based on molecular data. The second most commonly used
unsupervised method is the group of dimensionality reduction methods. In
the next paragraph, more details about such methods are provided.

### Dimensionality reduction methods

The goal of [DR]{acronym-label="DR" acronym-form="singular+short"}
methods is to transform a high dimensional dataset into a low
dimensional representation of the data while preserving as much as
possible its initial structure. More specifically, if three clusters
exist in the studied dataset, a lower dimensional representation of the
same data should also reveal the initial three clusters.
[DR]{acronym-label="DR" acronym-form="singular+short"} methods are part
of the feature extraction techniques which aim at finding latent
structures in the data. Those methods allow to summarize and transform a
large number of features in a smaller number of variables, which
mitigates the curse of dimensionality and is valuable for data
visualization. Note that these methods are different from feature
selection methods, which make a selection of the most important features
in the initial dataset [@Hastie2017]. Mainly two families of
[DR]{acronym-label="DR" acronym-form="singular+short"} methods exist:
matrix factorization methods (*e.g.* PCA, PLS, ICA, NMF) or neighbour
graphs approaches (*e.g.* t-SNE and UMAP).

**Matrix factorization methods examples**

Omics datasets, after pre-processing, often result in data matrices. For
example, in the case of [RNA-Seq]{acronym-label="RNA-Seq"
acronym-form="singular+short"}, after aligning the reads to a reference
genome (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_ngs\]](#fig:intro_ngs){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_ngs"}), reads counting is performed and generates a
matrix in which rows represent the genes (the features) and columns the
read counts for each sample (the observations). Matrix factorization
consists in decomposing an initial matrix in two smaller matrices
(Figure [\[fig:intro\_MF\]](#fig:intro_MF){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_MF"}). This decomposition leads to the generation
of new variables, in smaller numbers.

![**Matrix factorization methods**. The input matrix is decomposed,
under specific constraints, in two smaller matrices defined by new
variables that can be used to reveal structures and patterns in the
data.](Figures/Intro/MF_methods.pdf){width="90%"}

[\[fig:intro\_MF\]]{#fig:intro_MF label="fig:intro_MF"}

A classical matrix factorization method is Principal Component Analysis
([PCA]{acronym-label="PCA" acronym-form="singular+short"}). The goal of
[PCA]{acronym-label="PCA" acronym-form="singular+short"} is to project
the data to a lower dimensional space while maximizing the variance in
the data within this lower dimensional space. In
[PCA]{acronym-label="PCA" acronym-form="singular+short"}, the new
variables correspond to a linear combination of the initial features.
The matrix factorization results in the loading and score matrices. In
the first matrix, the columns correspond to the new variables, called
principal components and the rows indicate the contribution of each
feature to the latent variables. The principal components are
orthogonal; they correspond to the directions of maximal variance and
are ranked by the importance of variance explained, *i.e.* the first
principal component captures most of the variation in the dataset. The
second matrix contains the coordinates of the samples in the projected
space. While [PCA]{acronym-label="PCA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
maximizes the variance in the data, similar methods use other criteria.
For example, [ICA]{acronym-label="ICA" acronym-form="singular+short"},
which is a method attempting at disentangling independent signals that
are linearly mixed, maximizes the independence between the new
variables. Other methods have in addition specific constraints
[@Stein-Obrien2018]. [NMF]{acronym-label="NMF"
acronym-form="singular+short"}, for example, enforces the decomposed
matrices to be positive; this method has enabled the extraction of *de
novo* mutational signatures from whole genome sequencing data
[@Alexandrov2013a]. One limitation of those methods is that they are
linear models. In the following paragraphs, two non-linear methods based
on neighbour graphs are presented.

**Neighbor graphs methods examples**

The principle of [DR]{acronym-label="DR" acronym-form="singular+short"}
methods based on neighbor graphs models is to use neighbors distances
and similarities to represent the structure of the data in high
dimensions and then to embed this representation in a lower dimensional
space.

A method called [t-SNE]{acronym-label="t-SNE"
acronym-form="singular+short"} [@VanDerMaaten2008] has been widely used
in the past years to perform [DR]{acronym-label="DR"
acronym-form="singular+short"}. The [t-SNE]{acronym-label="t-SNE"
acronym-form="singular+short"} method can be seen as a neighbor graph
based algorithm [@McInnes2018] in a sense that similarity scores based
on Euclidean distances between neighbors are computed to embed the high
dimensional structure in a two-dimensional space. Samples positions in
the two-dimensional space are randomly initialized and are then moved
iteratively so that the pair-wise samples similarities match the ones in
the original space. [t-SNE]{acronym-label="t-SNE"
acronym-form="singular+short"} has limitations though. Firstly, the
method can be computationally intensive when applied to huge datasets.
Also, the interpretation of the [t-SNE]{acronym-label="t-SNE"
acronym-form="singular+short"} representation must be performed with
caution. Indeed, the method retains local structures but has limited
ability to maintain global structure [@McInnes2018].

Recently, a novel method called [UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP"
acronym-form="singular+short"} [@McInnes2018] was developed and is more
and more replacing the [t-SNE]{acronym-label="t-SNE"
acronym-form="singular+short"} method. [UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP"
acronym-form="singular+short"} is based on topological theory. The
algorithm builds what is called a simplicial complex which is a
representation of the data as a weighted graph (See Figure
[\[fig:intro\_UMAP\_topo\]](#fig:intro_UMAP_topo){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:intro_UMAP_topo"}), the weights corresponding to the
likelihood that there is a connection between two points
[@McInnes_doc; @AndyCoenen].

![**[UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP" acronym-form="singular+short"}
topological representation**. A) The building blocks of a simplicial
complex, the simplices. B) An example of a simplicial complex. Figures
from [@McInnes_doc].](Figures/Intro/simplicial_complex.pdf){width="90%"}

[\[fig:intro\_UMAP\_topo\]]{#fig:intro_UMAP_topo
label="fig:intro_UMAP_topo"}

As mentioned at the beginning of Section
[1.4](#Intro-method){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-method"}, in
high dimensional spaces data sparsity increases. To connect all the
points in the simplicial complex, [UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP"
acronym-form="singular+short"} varies the radius in which the search of
neighbors is performed by fixing the number of neighbors to consider
around each point [@McInnes_doc; @AndyCoenen]. This number of neighbors
influences how the data structure is preserved, low and high values
favoring local and global structures, respectively. Once the graphical
representation of the high dimensional data is constructed, a low
dimensional representation of the data is optimized so that it is as
close as possible to the high dimensional representation. One of the
advantages of [UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP" acronym-form="singular+short"}
over [t-SNE]{acronym-label="t-SNE" acronym-form="singular+short"} is
that the method better maintains the global structure of the data. Also,
[UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP" acronym-form="singular+short"} is
computationally more efficient [@McInnes2018]. Note that
[UMAP]{acronym-label="UMAP" acronym-form="singular+short"} can be
applied on a lower dimensional dataset resulting, for example, from a
[DR]{acronym-label="DR" acronym-form="singular+short"} method like
[PCA]{acronym-label="PCA" acronym-form="singular+short"}.

### Multi-omics data integration

The methods previously described consider as input a single dataset.
[DR]{acronym-label="DR" acronym-form="singular+short"} methods
processing multiple matrices also exist and can be used to integrate
multi-omics datasets. Such integration raises, though, multiple
challenges. Firstly, the data to integrate are heterogeneous. The nature
of the collected data is different, hence their statistical properties
can vary. Also, it can happen that all the omics datasets are not
available for each sample included in the analysis for technical reasons
or due to quality issues. Hence, distinct patterns of missing data can
occur in each omic dataset. Besides, integrating multiple datasets
amplifies the curse of dimensionality issues already encountered in each
dataset individually.

In 2018, a method called [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} was developed to integrate multi-omics
data while considering the previously mentioned challenges
[@Argelaguet2018]. [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} is an unsupervised analysis based on
matrix factorization (See Section
[1.4](#Intro-method){reference-type="ref" reference="Intro-method"}),
and can be seen as an extension of [PCA]{acronym-label="PCA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} to multi-omics data, called modalities or
also views. It is a factor analysis method which reduces the dimensions
of the data to a smaller number of unobserved factors, called the latent
factors. These factors differ from the [PCA]{acronym-label="PCA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} components. The latter are linear
combinations of the initial features, while in factor analyses the
initial features are expressed as linear combinations of the latent
factors, plus a residual noise term. To enable multi-omics data
(modalities) integration, [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} supports different noise models depending
on the nature of the data (continuous, counts or binary data). Based on
this model, [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
identifies different sources of variations across multiple omics data.
[MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA" acronym-form="singular+short"} presents
though several limitations. The model does not capture non-linear
relationships and assume features independence [@Argelaguet2018]. Also,
additional features accounting for samples structure, such as groups of
samples, batches or samples conditions, were not available in the
initial version of [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA"
acronym-form="singular+short"} but have been recently introduced in a
second version, [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA"
acronym-form="singular+short"}+ [@Argelaguet2020]. In this framework,
the [MOFA]{acronym-label="MOFA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
dimensionality reduction is performed with regards to additional samples
information (*e.g.* batch or cluster information) to identify sources of
variations shared between groups or exclusive to one of them.

Other integrative methods can take into consideration samples structure.
For example, the [PLS]{acronym-label="PLS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} method, which is a matrix factorization
method, attempts to relate two matrices: a response matrix and a matrix
gathering explanatory variables. The advantage of this method is that it
ensures that the new variables resulting from the dimensionality
reduction explain the response data. In that sense, the
[PLS]{acronym-label="PLS" acronym-form="singular+short"} method can be
considered as a supervised [DR]{acronym-label="DR"
acronym-form="singular+short"} framework. While
[PCA]{acronym-label="PCA" acronym-form="singular+short"} maximizes the
variance of the components, [PLS]{acronym-label="PLS"
acronym-form="singular+short"} maximizes the covariance between the
latent components of the response and explanatory datasets
[@Kim; @Hastie2017]. When the response data is a categorical variable, a
variant of [PLS]{acronym-label="PLS" acronym-form="singular+short"}
called [PLS-DA]{acronym-label="PLS-DA" acronym-form="singular+short"}
can be used to perform classification tasks, *e.g.* samples groups
prediction. In 2017, Lê Cao team published the mixOmics framework
implementing multivariate analyses tools, including the
[PLS]{acronym-label="PLS" acronym-form="singular+short"} methods
previously described [@Rohart2017]. The mixOmics tools also include the
[DIABLO]{acronym-label="DIABLO" acronym-form="singular+short"} method,
which is a multivariate dimension reduction method that can be used for
supervised multi-omics data integration [@Singh2019].
[DIABLO]{acronym-label="DIABLO" acronym-form="singular+short"} maximizes
the correlation between the features of the different omics datasets,
one of this dataset corresponding to the labelled samples. Hence, the
method extracts what the authors call multi-omics signatures that are
discriminant and can be used for prediction in a supervised framework.
